# March 11, 2021 Meeting

Attendees:

- Shane Carr - Google i18n (SFC), Moderator
- Long Ho - Dropbox (LHO)
- Myles C. Maxfield - Apple (MCM)
- Jeff Walden - SpiderMonkey/Mozilla (JSW)
- Louis-Aimé de Fouquières - Invited Expert (LAF)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Yusuke Suzuki - Apple (YSZ)
- Frank Yung-Fong Tang - Google i18n, V8 (FYT)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJS Foundation (RGN)
- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA), MessageFormat Working Group Liaison
- Leo Balter - Salesforce (LEO)

Standing items:

- [Discussion Board](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/projects/2)
- [Status Wiki](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/wiki/Proposal-and-PR-Progress-Tracking) -- please update!
- [Abbreviations](https://github.com/tc39/notes/blob/HEAD/delegates.txt)
- [MDN Tracking](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402-mdn)
- [Meeting Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?src=unicode.org_nubvqveeeol570uuu7kri513vc%40group.calendar.google.com)

## Liaison Updates

### MessageFormat Working Group

EAO: We are progressing but have not converged on the data model. We have a working group session for that on Monday. We've identified a few issues in a smaller group that we need to get resolved before the data model is finalized. And we have consensus decisions on a few matters, which are reflected in a PR on the MFWG repo.

## ES 2021 Update

LEO: We did the ECMA-402 cut for 2021. I included Andre Bargull's editorial review PR, which was great. I nominated him for the ECMA Recognition and ECMA Fellow awards. I think his contributions to ECMA-402 are invaluable. We need more time for the ECMA Fellow award, but the ECMA Recognition award should go through in the next ECMA GA meeting in June.

LEO: For the spec cut, see https://github.com/tc39/Reflector/issues/361. There are some requests to resolve from ECMA; it's not an amazing process, coming from the HTML specs, but it should conform to formalities that ECMA needs. If you'd like to review, the spec is currently in the opt-out period.

LEO: We should migrate from the master to main branch. We should scrub and look for references of the old branch name and investigate where redirection is available.

## Discussion Topics

### Intl.Segmenter Update

RGN: I presented an update yesterday at TC39. Mozilla wants to build it using ICU4X and asked for more time before Stage 4, which makes sense. Someone also asked for customizable dictionaries, but I don't plan to accommodate that in this version of the spec.

FYT: So it's not Stage 4 yet?

RGN: That's correct.

FYT: So the thing blocking Stage 4 is Mozilla, not the dictionary thing?

RGN: Correct. And it doesn't actually have practical consequences because it's too late anyway for ES 2021.

### Custom Dictionaries #133

https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter/issues/133

SFC: nathanhammond brought up some good points on i18n equity. How can we address those issues?

FYT: I disagree that Segmenter creates inequity, because the implementation is the thing that chooses which languages to support. ECMA-402 is not responsible for that. Second, I totally understand that there's a need for dictionaries, for example, but I consider this an enhancement to Segmenter. If he has a proposal to discuss how to shape Segmenter, we could accept that proposal. But I think it's not reasonable to stop shipping Segmenter just while we're waiting for this.

MCM: We have 4 points. (1), custom dictionaries would significantly increase the security vulnerabilities of this APIs, because it has a large surface area (these rules get compiled into bytecode and executed). (2), if this proposal is specifically about Cantonese, because ICU doesn't support Cantonese well, then we should fix it in ICU. Such a broad proposal is not a good fit for such a narrow use case. (3), these rules update in each version of ICU. In WebKit, we've moved away from using custom dictionaries specifically so we can use ICU's dictionaries because they update every year. Having an API that doesn’t get updated every year would be a mistake. (4), it's really hard for authors to get this right. It would be easy for a developer to write rules for some language, but those rules probably wouldn't work for most other languages. It’s a footgun - an API that’s easier to use wrong than right.

JSW: +1 on "just fix the bugs".

LHO: Creating this kind of API would create precedent for other APIs: for example, maybe you could bring your own date time or number patterns, and that precedence might not be good. The other thing is that this could be another use case of the data-driven API that SFC talked about. I am looking forward to that.

RGN: This issue seems out of scope to me, and I'm not convinced that an extension to the interface would help. In order to support author-supplied dictionaries, we'd need to create a dictionary _format_, and support it forever. And when I say "dictionary", I really should be using a more general term because Segmenter relies not just on word lists but also on boundary determination rules. So it seems like a real need, but I don't think the changes in Segmenter would adequately address it. Anyone who is dissatisfied with the backing data should either petition to improve it or should load their own and use that instead of Segmenter.

### Extension support #6

https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-localematcher/issues/6

LHO: Companies ship data with locales but different tones, like formal and casual, and they use extension keywords for that. They can also use Unicode extensions for things like calendar systems. So some of the decisions I'm trying to figure out are (1) should we support extensions in this API? I think the majority of the use cases are just, "my web site supports these languages, give me the best result." (2) If we decide to support extensions, should it be baked in from the get-go, or could it be in V2 of this API? I don't see it as a breaking change; it's more of an enhancement.

LAF: Developers have multiple ways to specify options. For example, they can specify the calendar in either the options or the locale.

SFC: (explains background on why it's in both places)

LHO: Another question is how to deal with string versus Intl.Locale object. There's a GitHub issue for that as well.

### Privacy evaluation of the API #3

https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-enumeration/issues/3

Mozilla review: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Zw6cYNJpL69HtQfA4-S7bKlCPywhhmoF6Mja-qy-JpU/edit#heading=h.kjtw5w5nldo7

MCM: We will take an action item to have this reviewed by members of the team who are more familiar with privacy. As a knee-jerk reaction, the sentence underneath "Detailed Analysis" seems right, but we will take this back to the team.

### Intl.Enumeration API: Reaffirm for Stage 2

FYT: I think the prior art is strong for this proposal. You can see in the README file.

FYT: For "Difficult to Implement in Userland", it's not clear to me how you measure that.

SFC: Implementing Intl Enumeration API manually would require loading a large set of data and exhaustively checking it against the implementation.

FYT: We should use the word "Inefficient" instead of "Difficult" in the title of this option.

RGN: I think "Expensive" would be another word. Both "Inefficient" and "Difficult" are types of being expensive. And it also covers other potential things.

FYT: As far as "Broad Appeal", I think there are two parts. (1), the primary use cases documented in the README. (2) In TC39, it was recommended that our API should be able to determine if a feature is available or not, because feature detection is not easy. We can use this API to tell if a particular time zone or calendar is available. This API allows the web site to determine if something is not here, and therefore they can load a polyfill.

RGN: I strongly agree with that point. Another point is that new APIs moving forward will require options to be an object.

FYT: So you're saying that it's another meta requirement for Intl APIs: all APIs should be able to perform feature detection easily.

LHO: Intl is nuanced, because feature detection relies also on language. For example, the Gregorian calendar might be supported, but only in English.

RGN: Yes; it could show up in several places.

FYT: Could you help me craft that sentence in the spec?

RGN: Yes.

MCM: The best way to do feature testing is a "question and answer" type approach. That doesn't require enumerating over a list. If that's a use case, we should try changing the formulation. That being said, being able to ask the system, "do you support the Chinese calendar", is definitely valuable.

SFC: I agree with MCM and LHO that a list, as Intl Enumeration API currently returns, doesn't seem like a good way to perform feature detection. Calendar systems, for example, could be supported in several levels: calculation only, calculation and formatting for a few languages, and calculation and formatting for all languages.

FYT: The other use case, besides feature detection, is to get back a list of time zones supported for the United States, or what collations are supported in Taiwan.

LHO: Yeah, I brought up a GitHub issue that saying you support something doesn't say you support it in every language, and that came up when I was trying to polyfill this API.

SFC: Supporting a time zone, for example, started by a need in Temporal, but it got moved to Intl. Supporting a time zone might mean you have TZDB data for it, but that doesn't mean we have display names.

MCM: That makes sense to me. Maybe what we should be doing is that if conveying of features is as complicated as you describe, maybe that determination should be at the point where the browser supports that function, rather than in a central registry.

SFC: I agree.

FYT: Should we move these functions down to each object, like Intl.DateTimeFormat for calendars and time zones, and Intl.NumberFormat for units and numbering systems?

MCM: I think that would be a benefit.

SFC: The way to support feature detection for the combination of calendar system with locale is to check resolvedOptions on Intl.DateTimeFormat. Changing the function namespace doesn't address that.

MCM: +1

SFC: I think we should go back to the picker use case as the primary use case.

MCM: If we wanted to go this direction, we would use the file picker API as prior art. Which would be an okay direction for us.

FYT: The prior arts I have listed in the README are not like file pickers.

MCM: APIs implemented in the browser are different from those implemented in JavaScript.

FYT: These four prior arts implement the data needed for pickers.

MCM: Browser APIs that are pickers work in a particular way.

SFC: I see two fundamental questions. (1), are time zone and calendar pickers useful, and (2), if they are useful, is the current API, returning a list of strings, the best way for us to support the picker use case?

MCM: If we focus on pickers, we should collaborate with Open UI, whose purpose of existence is to (partly to) work on pickers.

RCA: I believe one of the main drivers to have this proposal are picker’s , but also the web performance in general. Most popular libraries like moment-timezone(8 Million weekly downloads), have an extra cost depending on how many locales you support, those must be optimized by bundlers, in case you want to reduce the typical 1mb that momentjs has with all extra data.

Projects like OpenUI can bring us several opportunities to improve pickers that need this kind of data, but actual UI’s implemented in browsers lack those features and aren’t perfect dealing with timezones or other “special” localization features.

FYT: So, going back to the original question, do we satisfy the three points for Stage 2?

SFC: Do we have agreement that (1) pickers for time zones, calendars, etc., are the primary use case, and (2) those pickers have Broad Appeal?

RCA: +1

RGN: I think so, yes

JSW: We should think about whether this standards body is the right place for this proposal.  (Pickers as a UI element could be better satisfied with a new HTML input element type, that perhaps could accept attributes indicating “let me pick a calendar that is supported with respect to the given locale”, say.)

MCM: There’s a similar standardization effort happening in OpenUI for a font picker (for websites like Pages on the web). This is a very similar effort.

RGN: I agree. We should keep our eyes open for other use cases, but I can't come up with them right now.

SFC: Okay, so I'm going to consider that this proposal continues to meet our body's Stage 2 requirements, and we should continue working out the details, probably coordinating with other bodies.

### Rounding Options Puzzle #8

https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-numberformat-v3/issues/8

*Note: This discussion went on for about 40 minutes, but we do not have good notes from that time; shown below are some main points only.*

- SFC introduces the problem space, calling it "one of the most challenging puzzles I've had to solve in my work on API design"
- SFC walks through the examples, diagrams, and options posted in the above issue
- RGN asks questions about the examples, diagrams, and options
- LEO says he would like to see these options also implemented outside of Intl.NumberFormat
- SFC says that future work could involve adding these to DE's Decimal proposal
- FYT suggested that the 3 options SFC proposed seem reasonable, bikeshedding aside
- SFC and RGN to schedule a follow-up meeting

### What happened to Date Time Field? #18

https://github.com/tc39/intl-displaynames-v2/issues/18

FYT: What do other people think about this? I would be okay adding it back.

RGN: Okay, so this is the names of components of dates and times.

SFC: I think date time field names are at least as useful as calendar names. They are an important piece of any date-related application, including calendar apps or date/time pickers.

MCM: I have to drop.

FYT: Do we have consensus to add this back in?

(silence)

SFC: I consider that to be a tentative agreement, since it's 2 minutes after the end of our meeting. If any delegate wants to raise an objection to date field names being included, they will still have the opportunity to do so. Please comment on the above issue.
